@node Interpretation of unclear parts of the specification
@chapter Interpretation of unclear parts of the specification

@cindex specification interpretation

This chapter describes @sysname{}'s interpretation of passages in the
@commonlisp{} specification that do not describe the behavior of a
conforming reader completely unambiguously.

@menu
* Interpretation of Sharpsign C and Sharpsign S::
* Interpretation of Backquote and Sharpsign Single Quote::
@end menu

@node Interpretation of Sharpsign C and Sharpsign S
@section Interpretation of Sharpsign C and Sharpsign S

@cindex reader macro
@cindex complex literal
@cindex structure literal

At first glance, Sharpsign C and Sharpsign S seem to follow the same
syntactic structure: the dispatch macro character followed by the
sub-character followed by a list of a specific structure.  However, the
actual descriptions of the respective syntax is different.  For
Sharpsign C, the specification states:

@quotation
@t{#C} reads a following object, which must be a list of length two
whose elements are both reals.
@end quotation

For Sharpsign S, on the other hand, the specification describes the
syntax as:

@quotation
@t{#s(@var{name} @var{slot1} @var{value1} @var{slot2} @var{value2} ...)} denotes a structure.
@end quotation

Note how the description for Sharpsign C relies on a recursive @t{read}
invocation while the description for Sharpsign S gives a character-level
pattern with meta-syntactic variables.  It is possible that this is an
oversight and the syntax was intended to be uniform between the two
reader macros.  Whatever the case may be, in order to provide conforming
behavior, @sysname{} is forced to implement Sharpsign C with a recursive
@t{read} invocation and Sharpsign S with a stricter enforcement of the
specified syntax.

More concretely, @sysname{} behaves as summarized in the following table:

@multitable @columnfractions .5 .5
@headitem Input                                        @tab Behavior
@item @t{#C(1 2)}                                      @tab Read as @t{#C(1 2)}
@item @t{#C (1 2)}                                     @tab Read as @t{#C(1 2)}
@item @t{#C#||#(1 2)}                                  @tab Read as @t{#C(1 2)}
@item @t{#C#.(list 1 (+ 2 3))}                         @tab Read as @t{#C(1 5)}
@item @t{#C[1 2]} for left-parenthesis syntax on @t{[} @tab Read as @t{#C(1 2)}

@item @t{#S(foo)}                                      @tab Read as @t{#S(foo)}
@item @t{#S (foo)}                                     @tab Rejected
@item @t{#S#||#(foo)}                                  @tab Rejected
@item @t{#S#.(list 'foo)}                              @tab Rejected
@item @t{#S[foo]} for left-parenthesis syntax on @t{[} @tab Rejected
@end multitable

@sysname{} provides a strict version of the Sharpsign C macro function
under the name @t{eclector.reader:strict-sharpsign-c} which behaves as
follows:

@multitable @columnfractions .5 .5
@headitem Input                                        @tab Behavior
@item @t{#C(1 2)}                                      @tab Read as @t{#C(1 2)}
@item @t{#C (1 2)}                                     @tab Rejected
@item @t{#C#||#(1 2)}                                  @tab Rejected
@item @t{#C#.(list 1 (+ 2 3))}                         @tab Rejected
@item @t{#C[1 2]} for left-parenthesis syntax on @t{[} @tab Read as @t{#C(1 2)}
@end multitable

@node Interpretation of Backquote and Sharpsign Single Quote
@section Interpretation of Backquote and Sharpsign Single Quote

@cindex reader macro
@cindex quasiquote
@cindex function

The @commonlisp{} specification is very specific about the contexts in
which the quasiquotation mechanism can be used.  Explicit descriptions
of the behavior of the quasiquotation mechanism are given for
expressions which @emph{are} lists or vectors and it is implied that
unquote is not allowed in other expressions.  From this description, it
is clear that @t{`#S(foo :bar ,x)} is not valid syntax, for example.
However, whether @t{`#',foo} is valid syntax depends on whether
@t{#'@var{thing}} is considered to @emph{be} a list.  Since @t{`#',foo}
is a relatively common idiom, @sysname{} accepts it by default.

@sysname{} provides a strict version of the Sharpsign Single Quote macro
function under the name
@t{eclector.reader:strict-sharpsign-single-quote} which does not accept
unquote in the function name.
